.. _making-coefficients:

How to  generate coefficients from phase-space snapshots
========================================================


This example assumes that you have run the ``EXP/examples/Better``
simulation. But this notebook could be adapted for any simulation you
like.

We begin by importing ``pyEXP`` and friends and setting the working
directory.

.. code:: ipython3

    import os
    import yaml
    import pyEXP
    
    # I have the Better run here; obviously another use will want to
    # change this a directory containing some snapshots of their own
    #
    os.chdir('/home/weinberg/Nbody/Better')

Create the basis
----------------

Weâ€™ll only do the halo coefficients in this simple example. The
cylindrical coefficients would procede similarly. See the
``sample_basis`` notebook for an example of creating the cylindrical
basis.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Get the basis config
    #
    yaml_config = ""
    with open('basis.yaml') as f:
        config = yaml.load(f, Loader=yaml.FullLoader)
        yaml_config = yaml.dump(config)
    
    # Alternatively, you could construct this on the fly, e.g.
    bconfig = """
    ---
    id: SphereSL
    parameters :
      numr: 2000
      rmin: 0.0001
      rmax: 1.95
      Lmax: 4
      nmax: 10
      scale: 0.0667
      modelname: SLGridSph.model
    ...
    """
    print('-'*60)
    print('Read from file')
    print('-'*60)
    print(yaml_config)
    print('-'*60)
    print('Constructed from string')
    print('-'*60)
    print(bconfig)
    print('-'*60)
    
    # Construct the basis instance
    #
    basis   = pyEXP.basis.Basis.factory(yaml_config)


.. parsed-literal::

    ------------------------------------------------------------
    Read from file
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    id: SphereSL
    parameters:
      Lmax: 4
      modelname: SLGridSph.model
      nmax: 10
      numr: 2000
      rmax: 1.95
      rmin: 0.0001
      scale: 0.0667
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    Constructed from string
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---
    id: SphereSL
    parameters :
      numr: 2000
      rmin: 0.0001
      rmax: 1.95
      Lmax: 4
      nmax: 10
      scale: 0.0667
      modelname: SLGridSph.model
    ...
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    ---- SLGridSph::read_cached_table: trying to read cached table . . .
    ---- SLGridSph::read_cached_table: Success!!


Creating a particle reader
--------------------------

Now that we have a basis, we can use it to create coefficients from the
particle snapshots. ``pyEXP`` uses a ``ParticleReader`` object for that.

The first step is to hand off the files that comprise a snapshot for
every time slice. The ``ParticleReader`` provides a helper function for
that. There are two helper functions: ``parseFileList`` and
``parseStringList``. The first reads a list from a file and the second
takes a list. Otherwise they are the same. The file names in the list
are assumed to end with a snapshot index and an optional part index. For
example, if you have single files per snapshot, the list might look
like: ``myrun.00000``, ``myrun.00001``, etc. If you have multiple files
per snapshot, they will look something like ``myrun.00000_0001``,
``myrun.00000_0002``, ``myrun.00001_0000``, ``myrun.00001_0001``, etc.

Here is the call for a file:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Construct batches of files the particle reader.  One could use the
    # parseStringList to create batches from a vector/list of files.  NB:
    # a std::vector in C++ becomes a Python.list and vice versa
    #
    batches = pyEXP.read.ParticleReader.parseFileList('file.list', '')

We now iterate the ``batches`` created by the file parser to create the
coefficients. For each batch we create a new reader and pass the reader
to the basis instance. The ``basis.createFromReader`` member creates and
returns the coefficients. The coefficients are added to a coefficient
container called ``coefs``. Note: on the first call ``coefs=None`` so a
new container is created on the first time through.

.. code:: ipython3

    # This will contain the coefficient container, need to start will a
    # null instance to trigger construction
    #
    coefs   = None
    
    for group in batches:
    
        print("file group is", group)
    
        # Make the reader for the desired type.  One could probably try to
        # do this by inspection but that's another project.
        #
        reader = pyEXP.read.ParticleReader.createReader('PSPout', group, 0, False);
    
        # Print the type list
        #
        print('The component names are:', reader.GetTypes())
    
        compname = 'dark halo'
        reader.SelectType(compname)
        print('Selected', compname)
    
        print('Call createFromReader at Time', reader.CurrentTime(), 'for', reader.CurrentNumber(), 'particles')
    
        coef = basis.createFromReader(reader)
        print("Created coef")
    
        # We need this stupid idiom here because None is not mapping to a
        # null pointer.  There is probably a way to do this.  Suggestions
        # anyone?
        #                          This is optional---+
        #                                             |
        if coefs is None:           #                 v
            coefs = pyEXP.coefs.Coefs.makecoefs(coef, compname)
        else:
            coefs.add(coef)
    
        print('Added coef')
        print('-'*60)
    
    print('\nCompleted the file group list\n')
    
    print('The coefficient time list is', coefs.Times())


.. parsed-literal::

    file group is ['OUT.run7.00000']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.0 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00001']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.005000000000000004 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00002']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.010000000000000007 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00003']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.015000000000000012 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00004']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.020000000000000014 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00005']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.02500000000000002 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00006']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.030000000000000023 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00007']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.035000000000000024 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00008']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.04000000000000003 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00009']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.04500000000000003 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    file group is ['OUT.run7.00010']
    The component names are: ['dark halo', 'star disk']
    Selected dark halo
    Call createFromReader at Time 0.05000000000000004 for 100000 particles
    Created coef
    Added coef
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
    Completed the file group list
    
    The coefficient time list is [0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.035, 0.04, 0.045, 0.05]


